[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> And let's see, we've got
the road closed sitch here.
What do you guys think?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We were sleeping,
and our house phone
rang at 5:00 in the morning.
And Lauren, my wife, Lauren, and
I we both had the same thought.
Well, if it's an emergency,
they'll call back.
And two minutes later,
it rang again now.
I was like, oop, we're--
eyes open in bed.
Lauren went and
picked up the phone,
and it was my sister
saying, we're packing up.
We're on our way.
Santa Rosa is on fire.
We need to get out of here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You think it's not that big.
They'll be able to put that out.
That's your first
thought is this will just
pass today or something.
>> Where you at?
>> All right.
All right.
Let me get her feet.
Her husband's right behind you.
>> It's been waiting
for its moment,
being that we're in
this fire ecology.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We've forgotten that we
have an important role to play
in managing these ecosystems.
And that our care for water and
fire eventually come together.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When there's no management,
and all these young little
trees have a chance to grow up,
they start crowding each other
out.
And as they crowd each
other out, some of them
start to get a little sickly.
Some of them start
to die off, and they
create these fire ladders.
We've got a fir tree growing
in the shade of other firs
and oaks.
And it has all
these low branches.
And look at this,
these branches,
they can't survive in the
shade, so they just die.
And it's essentially a ladder
that the fire can follow right
up into the crown of the tree.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For thousands of
years, these ecosystems
were managed by a whole
set of different organisms.
The grizzly bear used to be
throughout all of California.
They'll get into these
little rotting trees,
and they'll break
them onto the ground,
and they'll rip them up,
and they'll look for grubs,
and they'll look for mushrooms.
And they're part of that
understory management.
So we don't have
bear doing that.
In the grasslands, we
don't have our herds of elk
that we used to have, and
our antelope that would stomp
the grass into the ground.
That would manage
that thatch layer,
that build up of organic
matter that happens over time.
So without those big animals,
we don't get that management
regime again.
And we've taken the land away
from the Indigenous people.
And the Indigenous
people of these ecologies
understood the role of fire.
And they knew the
right time of year
to provide a healing fire,
a fire that slowly moves
through the understory
that consumes
a lot of that underbrush
that would in a big fire,
go up into those canopies.
So it's part of that
fuel load reduction.
It alkalinizes the soil.
It removes disease.
There's so many benefits
to a healing fire.
This isn't one of
those healing fires.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we're here on the
side that hasn't burned.
There is a lot of
material here, a lot.
And so if a fire blows through
like it did on that hillside,
it's just going to have
all of this material
to fuel that fire, and get
it up into the forest, which
is of course, scary
and catastrophic.
So this is kind of an example.
Because here's the
other challenge,
is that because all this
material is aerial now,
it's just sort of oxidized.
So this actually represents
carbon right here.
This represents what
could be topsoil,
right, the sponge of the
Earth that can absorb water.
But because this material
is just up here in the air,
it can't actually break
down, and so it has
a hard time turning to soil.
So what with the elk would do
is would actually come in here
and smash this material
down to the ground
to the surface, where
during the winter,
that water could wick up, and
there'd be biological activity.
And it could actually decompose.
Not to mention, that elk
would come and actually
munch this back, so provide
that grazing function.
So in this grassland, we have
all of this potential soil, all
of this carbon,
which at this point,
is very low function, right?
It's just waiting
here for a fire.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We've pretty intensely
reduced the population of elk
and other wild animals.
And now, grasslands are
in a dangerous decline.
They are primed for fire,
and drained of water.
>> I want to get some pipe just
hooked up to the ag tote en
route, so I can test its flow.
I actually graze all that too.
Those are the Bald Hills.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've seen how land can just wake
up with thoughtful disturbance,
shift things just a little bit,
and watch water tables lift.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Hi, cutie pie.
Usually, when I don't want
them to pay attention to me,
I kind of loaf past them,
and I don't make eye contact.
And that way, they don't think
I have any specific agenda.
But secretly, I do
have a specific agenda.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Grasses co-evolved by
being grazed, and sometimes
burned by having literal tons
of animals removing biomass,
digesting it, dropping
it in the form
of their dung and their
urine, and knocking everything
else down in their wake.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This, right here, if it
were not grazed this year,
would be considered thatch,
grass that has grown up
and is not trampled,
grazed, or burned.
You look at it,
you'll see what looks
like a healthy strand of
grass, but if you look at it,
a lot of times there's
actually exposed
soil between every
individual blade of grass.
If a grassland is
grazed well, the carbon
and all the nutrients
that are here in the grass
are being fed down
into the soil.
And when you put organic
matter onto soil year
after year, when it's
dry and when it's wet,
and these different
times in different ways
just keep cycling the stuff
back to the soil, the more
water that you can hold, and the
longer you can hold that water.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
All a grassland needs,
good grazing to be healthy.
And not all grazing
is created equal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A lot of ranch land and
rangeland is grazed in a way
where the cows have pretty
much continuous access
to the grass if not for a whole
season, for the whole year.
That means that as soon
as a species of plant
starts to grow, it's eaten.
And if it starts to regrow,
it's eventually eaten.
So its ability and
opportunity to grow
to maturation, to flower, to
fruit, to senesce and disperse
its seeds is--
it's collapsed.
There's just the
odds are against it.
You can have a rain event that's
five inches in a few hours
fall on a grassland,
but if that grassland
has been in decline
for a long time,
then there might be
a lot of bare ground.
There might be a
lot of old plants.
That rain is just going to keep
hammering that ground, compress
it, then just run off
such that it's not
in our watershed for very long.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WHISTLING]
So I want plants
to be able to grow
to their full
reproductive capacity.
I want them to be
able to fully recover
before they're grazed again.
And a fundamental part
of planned grazing
is keeping animals on the move.
So instead of having cows
scattered throughout a 400 acre
pasture four months
out of the year,
I'll have them in a much smaller
pasture for maybe just a day,
or a few hours.
And then I keep moving them.
So what that means is that all
of the grassland surrounding
where the cows are gets that
much more time to recover,
such that the soil's
becoming more rich in carbon,
more rich in organic matter,
and the specie's diversity is
increasing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's the notion of slow it,
spread it, sink it, right?
When rain hits a layer of
litter instead of bare ground
or thatch, the
particles are broken up.
They're actually
smaller in size,
and can percolate,
and infiltrate
into the soil at a slower rate.
So instead of just
washing in this case,
into Martin Creek,
which runs eventually
into the Russian
River, and rushes
towards our coast
and the headlands,
it's actually a lot of it is
infiltrating into the soil
hanging out there for longer,
slowly leaving, slowly
percolating into our aquifer.
The water table rises over time.
Plants are greener
later into the year.
They're greener earlier.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Then Deborah, Debbie,
just the ones that kind of
sidle up next to me and want
to hang out and be social.
>> Efron and Debbie.
>> And then the
bulls have names.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If you can increase the
infiltration rate of soil
even just a small amount,
but that small amount
is multiplied across
thousands of acres, watershed
to watershed to watershed
across the whole state,
across the whole country,
the impact is unprecedented.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When Western society
first came to this land,
instead of coming here and
telling us how we should be
living, what if they
had come and said,
teach us how you
survive on this land,
and we're willing to listen.
How would things be
more different now?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If we had come in that way
to settle on this Turtle Island,
our relations with First
Nations peoples would be very
different.
We would have continued
to learn from them,
and not have been
in such conflict
with their culture
and way of life.
And instead, we named it savage.
We named it worthless.
And we pursued a
path of genocide.
So it's never too
late to bear witness.
>> They gathered up all the
Indians in this valley in 1863,
force marched them down south
of Bakersfield, Fort Tejon,
and to get rid of everybody.
But you look, we're still here.
And that's how important
this valley is.
My grandmother at a
very young age actually,
she was marched all
the way to Fort Tejon.
She escaped from there.
And everybody else she
escaped with got caught.
She got all the way back
up here to this valley
all by herself as a young girl.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Paiutes were naked.
They were shoeless,
no water, no food.
They marched them south of
Independence to Lone Pine.
And so when a lot of the women
and children got to Owens Lake,
they tried to get away and swim.
And so now imagine you
have one of the stories
is there's 100 military
people, soldiers,
with a repeating rifles shooting
women and children in the lake.
And so a lot a lot of women
and children perished there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You know, I was watching the
trains coming just filled with
these oil tankers, and all
these building materials,
this wood and everything.
And there's a way today,
it's like, oh man,
do we need more of this?
But as I put myself
back like 100 years,
and this sense of, wow, the awe
that I would have felt years
ago with like, man, we
are building America,
like, we're creating
new possibilities,
and we're growing into
a great nation, and just
this whole thing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We, as humans can
begin new intentions,
and create the possibility
of enough water for all.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's a tender excitement
when imagining what's possible
moving forward.
If we designed our lives
around water differently,
what could this Earth look like?
What could our cities look like?
LA, and its relationship
to the Owens Valley
is something of a bellwether
for the kind of changes
that are needed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This water that's flowing
through here is the Owens
River, the Sacramento River,
and the Colorado River.
Each one of these rivers
extended hundreds of miles
into Los Angeles.
And it's really ironic
and sort of painful
when we have enough water,
but we throw it away.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What does a forest ecosystem,
a forest watershed do?
And how can we overlay that onto
a city to fix the city fast?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
That very large oak tree,
the soil underneath it
is a tank, and a sponge,
and a treatment plant.
So the tree has grown for
several hundred years,
and it's been building soil.
And that soil is
habitat for all kinds
of critters, microscopic
organisms, fungi, worms.
And then larger and larger
critters that dig and drill,
rodents.
And it makes a big sponge
that captures and holds water.
And within a couple of
feet, that water is clean.
And then it's sent to recharge
all of our groundwater
aquifers.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
With trees capturing,
cleaning water, putting it
in the ground, preventing
floods, holding soil,
we lost all that when
we built the city.
We go again to
Australia, Melbourne,
they did the science,
did the math,
and realized they needed to
double their tree canopy cover
from 20% just like Los
Angeles has today, to 40.
We all need to be thinking
about catching, capturing.
Because when we catch it, we
recharge the water in the soil.
That water goes and
recharges our aquifers.
When that happens, our
streams come back to life,
even city streams.
We planted all these trees,
seven miles, three hours,
3,000 people.
We crowd-sourced.
This is the largest
living monument
in the world to Dr.
Martin Luther King.
You can see it from space.
This is a really good
place to contrast current
with what's soon to be.
Notice how wet the ground is,
how much water was wasted,
and it's just either
carried pollutants away,
or it's now evaporating.
Here, the water is captured
so elegantly, there's
no waste in overspray.
It's being watered directly
to the soil, directly
to the roots, and the aquifer.
Where we don't have enough space
for enough capture in trees
and soil, we have tanks.
This is a thimble, a tiny,
tiny thimble, a rain barrel.
But our vision is to have large
tanks, 1,000 gallons, 5,000
gallons, 10,000
gallons per house.
>> All right.
We're going to go out front, OK?
>> Yeah.
>> I want to go.
>> OK.
>> You have my phone?
>> Yeah.
>> It cuts off the water
here, and it starts to flow
into the cisterns.
Up here is a bug catcher, and
it catches all the sediment,
and makes sure that no
pest or anything, bugs
get into the system, comes
down, and travels from there
and into these cisterns.
They fill up at the same
time, so they're always
at the same level.
So this level here lets us know
how much water is in there now.
I was surprised.
I didn't think that these
cisterns would ever fill up.
They're huge.
But I also underestimated
how much water
was coming off of my roof.
LA doesn't get a
whole lot of rain.
But when we get rain, it
just it-- it's like it's
shooting down.
And I mean, it just comes down.
And these things overflowed.
So they hold, well,
865 gallons a piece.
So I had 1600, 1700
plus gallons, plus,
whatever overflowed.
My neighbors called.
Now I know what to look forward
to when we get big rains,
and what to prep
for, and just start.
Maybe I should start
planting more plants,
so I can use more water.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> And I could foresee a
situation in which the whole
city was sort of smartly
networked together rainwater
harvesting, where when it sees
the giant storm coming 24 hours
out, opens the valve at the
bottom of everybody's rainwater
tank, so each tank would
have its overflow basin.
So that band of
the storm passes,
valve opens, smartly networked
through the whole city,
it drains the thing
into the soil.
Then it catches the next surge.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For decades, they've been
mining gravel to make concrete
for freeways and
stuff like that.
It's left a huge
hole in the ground.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The city, and the County
of Los Angeles have combined
together to purchase this
land from the gravel operator.
And it will become a beautiful
lake and treatment wetland.
So it's going to take all
the bulk of the floodwater
from a couple of miles north,
the massive flow of floodwater.
All of this will go
straight to the aquifer,
recharging and rebuilding
LA's water supply.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This will be a beautiful
park and lake, tall trees,
places for people
to play and be.
>> A flood is simply the result
of having more water appear
within a given location than
can be absorbed by the ground.
So if you have areas
that are hard panned,
you have areas that are paved
over, then the water that falls
is simply going to hit the
ground and it's going to run.
>> Whenever it rained, this
street would be completely
flooded.
People couldn't get
out of their homes,
kids couldn't get to school.
The street was removed,
major, major deep trench dug,
and two gigantic trench drains,
or French drains were put in.
These are big pipes,
perforated, so holes throughout.
And that's taking the bulk of
the floodwater that's running
off of everyone else's
house, and put it underground
into the pipe in a catch basin
that's in the street by that
grey car.
All of that goes through
a filtration system
is put in the
pipe, and the water
is stored, and slowly seeps
into the ground biomimicking
the tree once again, but
extended underground.
First of all, we
capture as much,
and keep it on the property
so it doesn't run off,
keep as much of that
water as possible.
That that overflows
into the street
is captured from the
street in a curb cut.
That green strip
called the parkway is
retrofitted to be like a creek.
So the water can flow
in through a drain,
flows along a meandering swale,
a creek shaped structure.
But it's lined and loaded
with plants and mulch.
This basin is
totally full of it.
Next, totally full.
And it continues down.
And then the neighbor down there
has got a whole bunch of basin.
All of that returns water to our
water supply, our groundwater.
And that's vital,
because that will
be a big part of our
ongoing water supply.
It allows us to be taking
less water from other regions,
so more water can stay
in the Owens Valley
especially, pull it back from
being the desert that it was.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What if we run diagonal
and cross the road now?
>> There we go.
>> Yeah, she's been walking
with us for a while.
>> Since the mountains.
>> That's incredible.
>> Since a few blocks back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We walked the last
three weeks 200 miles.
And tomorrow is our last day.
>> Oh, good for you guys.
>> Yeah.
And we're walking over
three years all the way
from the headwaters
above Mono Lake,
and next year, we'll be walking
through LA for three weeks
to the ocean.
>> Bye
>> Bye.
[FIRE CRACKLING]
>> [HOWLING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
[FIRE CRACKLING]
>> If you're able to walk
out of here tomorrow,
what do you walk with?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) Time
is going to kill me.
Well, at least
that's what they say.
I heard it by the fire.
And there was
nothing more to say.
I ain't never met a river
gone and treat it this way.
All of you people will never be.
>> So it's pretty incredible to
watch all the snow come down,
and to just not be anticipating
this amount of snowfall
to happen during this year,
and for it to all come in those
moments in January.
And it's no longer flowing.
>> So this was
cranking at one point?
>> Oh yeah.
Yeah, it was cranking.
It was cranking.
You can definitely see that
there was a lot of water that
went through this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And so the water will naturally
flow into the terminus
as Owens Lake.
And so that's where water wants
to go is down into the lake.
And the lake is I believe,
calling to the water
and saying, come.
And all the life
that wants to erupt
from the creation
again of this lake
is saying, come and be a part.
We're ready to
restore this place.
And in the midst of
that, LA says no.
This will not become a lake.
In fact, we're going
to put this line across
to stop any water
from getting there.
And so they put up these
berms to direct water
away from this
lake, because they
want to protect
their infrastructure.
The moment we believe
we control nature
is the moment that nature
begins to control us,
in a very physical way,
in a threatening way.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> From a distance and through
fences we greeted the Cascades
at the end of our walk.
I remember feeling a profound
relief to have arrived there.
And I wondered what it
was like for the water
to meet the sun
again, if it longed
for soil and stone,
or roots and critters.
In that culminating
moment, it felt
natural to envision a humanity
that's wise, sensitive,
and willing to heal.
And I like to think of this film
as an offering to that dream.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Unity is like unavoidable.
You know, we're realizing that
we're all in this together.
You know, especially as
we watch the climate start
to deteriorate, and
we realize that we all
play our part in that, and that
we all live on planet Earth.
And there's this thin
veil of atmosphere
that keeps us from getting
blasted by the sun,
and frozen by the
winds of space.
Like, we got to work
together, you know?
If we're in the
Anthropocene, and we're
making more change on this
planet than any other species,
we've got to be self-aware, and
we've got to check each other
and say, is what we're
doing good for everyone
and everything?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And water is at
the heart of that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We are part of
a huge history.
And as humans at this
time, we're a tiny speck.
And as that, if we can head like
on a sailboat a trim tab just
be part of turning
the boat in the best
direction possible for
all life to continue,
I will go out of
here with gratitude.
Yeah.
>> Hope springs eternal.
You know, and I'm not talking
like that fake hope dope.
And I think as long
as my attitude is--
as long as we're waking
up in the morning,
it's another day
to get it right.
You got another day.
You got another-- you
got another opportunity.
[MUSIC - JACOB COLLIER &
JUSTIN KAUFLIN, "FLOW FREELY"]
Flow freely when you need me.
Swift upon your way to meet me.
Let go, you rise to greet me.
Bring me back to life.
Oh.
Flow freely when you see me.
Lift me from the
road beneath me.
Let go, you hide to seek
me under open skies.
Oh, whoa.
Time flows on and on and on.
And the tide turns
on, and on, and on.
And the tide goes
[WATER SOUNDS]